Improve index content (#25)
carpentries-incubator/software-development-with-genai: index.md

site: sandpaper::sandpaper_site
---

# Introduction

Welcome to this lesson on the use of generative AI for developing research software.

Software is critical to research - the Software Sustainability Institute's UK Research Software Survey found that more than 92% of academics use research software, and 56% write their own code.
A study also conducted by the Institute also found an exponential increase in the prevalence of software-related terms in publications between 2000-2017.

![Percentage of research publications with software-related terms 2000-2017, S.J.Hettrick](fig/software-terms-publications.png)

As a specific institutional example, when researchers were asked "how important is research software to your work?" in a software study conducted at the University of Southampton, 73% of respondents indicated that it was "Vital".

For many researchers, writing code for data analysis or software development can be boring, frustrating, or intimidating. 

> Most researchers would rather be thinking about and researching their subject matter rather than spending lots of time learning a programming language and writing code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most researchers would rather be thinking about and researching their subject matter than spending lots of time learning a programming language and writing code.
```

## Generative AI tools for research software

| Episode | Main tool | Examples |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Prompting effectively |  Chatbot | ChatGPT, Claude, duck.ai, Ollama  |
| Explain and clean scripts | Chatbot | ChatGPT, Claude, duck.ai, Ollama |
| Writing and validating scripts | IDE | Visual Studio Code, Cursor, Windsurf, Zed |
| Testing and refactoring scripts | IDE | Visual Studio Code, Cursor, Windsurf, Zed |
| Guiding agents from script to codebase | AI Agent | Copilot, Codex, Claude Code, OpenCode |

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

## Which tools are most commonly used by researchers?

In a study of 868 scientists who code as part of their research, ChatGPT was by far the most common tool used to assist with research coding, used by 64% of participants, followed by GitHub Copilot, used by 12% of participants. 

> *(O'Brien, G., Parker, A., Eisty, N., & Carver, J. (2025). More code, less validation: Risk factors for over-reliance on AI coding tools among scientists. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19644.)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*(O'Brien, G., Parker, A., Eisty, N., & Carver, J. (2025). A survey of generative AI adoption and perceived productivity among scientists who program. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19644.)*
```

Updating the title to match the latest version.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Credits

> These training materials were partially adapted from the materials developed by

Reviewer: The details are missing from this sentence. I guess it's the Southampton RSG content. But did you also want to mention the UCLA lesson and/or anything else here?
